Computational thinking
BY SUSAN GERMAN
Students develop computational thinking by approaching new situations using a
variety of computer-based methods, including simulation, data
mining, networking, automated
data collection, gaming, algorithmic reasoning, robotics, and programming. Computational thinking is different from mathematical
thinking. According to Sneider et
al. (2014), students develop mathematical thinking when they attempt to approach a new situation
with their acquired math skills,
including counting, arithmetic, algebra, geometry, calculus, set theory, and topology. Computational
thinking is part of the Next Generation Science Standards science and
engineering practices (see Figure
1). Computational thinking can be
used in conjunction with any of
the practices.
Implementing
computational thinking
Computer simulations provide
students with the opportunity to
model phenomena by changing
the input conditions and measuring the outcome. While I firmly
believe it is best for students to interact with physical phenomena, a
computer simulation can be more
time efficient and allows students
to try out “What if…?” scenarios
in a safe manner. Computer simulations are best used in situations
where physical phenomena are
difficult to study directly, such
as the solar system or molecular
motion. However, while electric
circuits are directly observable,
using a simulation can bring the
unobservable parts of the phenomenon to an observable level.
I developed an assessment on
electric circuits after my students
completed a unit on electricity,
during which they learned about
series and parallel circuits. The
assessment used the PhET Circuit
Construction Kit: DC-Virtual Lab
(see Resources), which allowed
students to virtually construct different types of circuits, adjust the
| FIGURE 1: NGSS SEP: Mathematical and Computational
Thinking (NGSS Lead States 2013, Appendix F, p. 10).
Mathematical and computational thinking in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences
and progresses to identifying patterns in large data sets and using
mathematical concepts to support explanations and arguments.
• Use digital tools (e.g., computers) to analyze extensive data sets for
patterns and trends.
• Use mathematical representations to describe and support scientific
conclusions and design solutions.
• Create algorithms (a series of ordered steps) to solve a problem.
• Apply mathematical concepts and processes (e.g., ratio, rate, percent,
basic operations, simple algebra) to scientific and engineering questions
and problems.
• Use digital tools and mathematical concepts and arguments to test and
compare proposed solutions to an engineering design problem.
36 TEACHER TO TEACHER
number of resistors used, and add
switches. Students studied and
measured the current (amps) and
voltage (volts) of the following
circuits: simple (Figure 2), series
(Figure 3), parallel (Figure 4), and
complex (Figure 5).
While building circuits and
measuring current and voltage,
students asked, “Why are the
charges moving slower in the
series circuit than in the parallel
circuit?” To determine that the
chargers were moving slower,
students chose to use an ammeter to measure the current of the
circuit. When the ammeter measured lower amperage on wires
where the charges moved slower,
students were able to observe the
current and build a mental model of electric current. Alternatively, students could work with
a physical circuit and set up the
series circuit and parallel circuit
with light bulbs. Students would
be able to observe differences in
the brightness of the bulbs and
make measurements of the voltage and current in each circuit;
however, the actual movement
of charge would be based on a
student’s inference. Using a computer simulation as a scientific
model allows unseen parts of the
circuit to be made visual.
To assess student understanding of series, parallel, and complex circuits, I asked them to build
models of a circuit of a flashlight
with three bulbs and specific design criteria. (Figure 6). In the
simulation, students had access
to a large voltage battery as well
as a regular battery. While using a 100-V battery is beyond the
norm of flashlight batteries, allowing students to use the battery
forced students to think deeper
in constructing a circuit. In order to solve the problem created
by using a battery too large for a
flashlight, student needed to add
resistors in order for the circuit to
properly work. (Students set a lot
of simulation circuit fires as they
worked on solutions.)
Conclusion
Computational thinking is more
than using a computer simulation to make observations. This
lesson required students to “use
digital tools and mathematical
concepts and arguments to test
and compare proposed solutions to an engineering design
problem” (NGSS Lead States,
Appendix F, 2013). My students
used a simulation to explore their
“What if…?” questions when
they integrated the high-voltage
battery as the energy source for
their circuit and created a circuit
that meets the requirements of
the assessment.
Furthermore, the problem was
engineering in nature. Students
used a simulation to develop
and test ideas for how well they
met the defined criteria—a process made quicker by using a
simulation rather than physical
materials. The important step in
the lesson is for students to understand that the simulation is
programmed with algorithms
based on data for how a physical
circuit works and abstractions
that allow students to visualize
| FIGURE 2: Simple circuit
| FIGURE 3: Series circuit
| FIGURE 4: Parallel circuit
| FIGURE 5: Complex circuit
July 2019 37
TEACHER TO TEACHER
| FIGURE 6: Flashlight problem
You want to create a flashlight using three bulbs. It will be essential to
control which lights are turned on (one light, two lights, or three lights). You
can use one or two batteries, no more than three switches, and as much wire
as necessary. The flashlight design should maximize the brightness of the
bulbs and be on one circuit.
Use the simulation we have been working with to come up with a circuit
design.
• Screenshots of your final design
• A written explanation of your final design
• Claim-a statement describing your final design
• Evidence-data from investigation that supports your design
• Reasoning-connect the evidence to claim by describing the science
involved
• Data on your final design (voltage and current)
the normally unseen portions of
the phenomenon. •
REFERENCES
NGSS Lead States. 2013. Next
Generation Science Standards: For
states, by states. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
Sneider, C., C. Stephenson, B. Schafer,
and L. Flick. 2014. Teachers Toolkit:
Exploring the science framework and
NGSS: Computational thinking in the
science classroom. Science Scope
38 (03): 10–15.
Yadav, A., H. Hong, and C. Stephenson.
2016. TechTrends (2016) 60: 565.
RESOURCE
Circuit simulation—https://phet.
colorado.edu/en/simulation/circuitconstruction-kit-dc-virtual-lab
Susan German (sgerman@hallsville.org) is a science teacher at Hallsville R-IV School District in Hallsville, Missouri.
Grade Level K–5
SIMULATIONS • ASSESSMENTS • VIDEOS
Be a Sky Sleuth helps
students fi gure out
how patterns can be
used to predict the
positions of the Sun,
Moon, and stars.
Thinking
Beyond
English Language
Arts Connections
Mathematics
Connections
Differentiated
Learning
Use activities in the teacher’s guides to implement
three-dimensional learning in your classrooms.
STEM for kids! Phenomenon-based, three-dimensional learning content that’s designed using the 5E model and
 incorporates the science and engineering practices (SEPs), crosscutting concepts (CCCs), and disciplinary core ideas
(DCIs). Comprehensive teacher’s guides are available. Each teacher’s guide provides connections to the grade-level
content (including science, ELA, and mathematics) plus tips and practical information to enhance the e-book experience.
Use activities in the teacher’s guides to implement three-dimensional learning in your classroom.
Lexile Level: 500L
Visit www.nsta.org/ebooks/GradesK-5
to learn more and order.
Purchases of 10+ e-books of a single title will include
a detailed teacher's guide specifi c to that e-book.
38
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.